Here are some command line operations for managing the packages installed on Debian Linux.

To list all of the packages currently installed on you RPi do:
dpkg-query -l

To search for packages that you may want to install
aptitude search text to search
aptitude search ant
aptitude search apache2
apt-cache search apache2

To install a package
Search as above to find the package's full name. for example
aptitude search jdk
sudo apt-get install openjdk-9-jdk
or
sudo apt-get install oracle-java9-jdk
You can use sudo apt-get install a-package-name to update a package also

To remove a package and its configuration files
sudo apt-get --purge remove oracle-java8-jdk

To update the system (should be done periodically)
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
// and follow prompts during the update process. Primarily it will ask
// whether you want to restart any updated servcies automatically.

A web reference for listing installed packages:
https://wiki.debian.org/ListInstalledPackages

A web reference to a cheatsheet for apt-get commands
http://www.cyberciti.biz/tips/linux-debian-package-management-cheat-sheet.html

If your RPi is not able to connect to the internet, then the package
management facilites will not work unless you separately download each package
necessary to install (and all of its dependencies). You can place this in a special
folder so they will be installed by the package manager. See the documentation on
Aptitude. Without a package manager, installations commonly involve downloading
the source for the package as a compressed tar file. For example, suppose you
want to manually install the GNU Smalltalk programming language package.
Providing you have already installed all of the pre-requisites, download
the source from:
http://smalltalk.gnu.org/download
to get:
smalltalk-2.0.11.tar.gz
Then from the command line in the directory containing the gz file:
tar -xf smalltalk-2.0.11.tar.gz
This will create the directory smalltalk-2.0.11
cd smalltalk-2.0.11/
./configure
make
make check
sudo make install

These operations will configure the package to your RPi system, compile
the implementation's source code, check that the compilation worked
correctly, and then install it so that the Smalltalk tools are in your PATH.

Other packages can be manually installed (Java-based, for example) by
downloading the binary versions. Ant is a good example.
Obtain the binary distribution for Ant from:
http://ant.apache.org/bindownload.cgi
to get the archive:
apache-ant-1.9.4-bin.tar.gz
From the directory into which you downloaded execute:
tar -xf apache-ant-1.9.4-bin.tar.gz
This will create the directory apache-ant-1.9.4
Now add this directory's bin sub directory to your path since the bin
directory contains ant's executable programs.
